So why don't you pronounce your name for me so I can... Petro Popescu is speaking to Nicholas Basbains?
Yeah.
Right.
Are you French by Greek?
Yeah.
Oh, you're one country over.
That's amazing.
It's just perfect right now.
But how do you pronounce your name?
They're true for places.
That's just the way it looks.
That's the way it looks.
So you came from Romania about 20 years ago, I guess, right?
No, actually, less than that.
I came from Romania about, I defected about 15 years ago.
And I went to the American Film Institute in Los Angeles as a student, the directing client.
I'm just going to put this here.
And I wanted to...
I wanted to direct movies, which I did, and on the way I wrote screenplays, two things happened.
I found out that I am a much better, which I knew, I had published books before, but I found out that I liked much better writing books than directing movies.
And the second thing, during the screenplay writing period, I had a massive
experience with social America, so to speak.
So my knowledge of English, of the lived English language, got to a point where I had my confidence back to write fiction.
I remember that moment.
It was an extremely wonderful moment for me.
Your specialty obviously seems to be to develop out of exploration, films of exploration and discovery.
You have a previous film, which also involves
That was Amazon Beaming, but that was non-fiction.
That was the true story of a man who discovered the source of the Amazon River.
Well, this one is a complete invention.
I understand, but nevertheless, it seems to be charmed or taken by it.
Tell me a little bit about the premise of this book.
The premise of the book is the what if, and what if... Are you going to have anything for you?
I had this this morning, but... Can I take a minute, please?
Sure, just coffee for me is fun.
Actually, how about a blueberry muffin?
I know that there are, in various parts of the planet, habitats that
have not changed very much for the last few million years, either in weather patterns or in flora and fauna.
And there are habitats like that pretty much along the equator, some in Africa as well.
So I asked myself, what if?
there was a remaining packet of proto-humans who would be alive, but they would be the way they were two million years ago, which is not terribly far-fetched because
There is one species that is the ancestor of apes, monkeys, and humans.
That's the so-called tarsioids.
They are considered to be the pre-monkeys.
The ones that include the bush babies, the turtles, the lemurs, those animals that have extremely large big eyes at the front of the face, which is one of the first traits that started to separate hominids from the other mammals.
I was accused that I pay an inordinate amount of attention to anatomy.
In fact, in the New York Times, I was chastised for describing the size of the genitals.
That was kind of a cheap shot because the production is extremely important.
It was one of the most important factors in positive biofeedback.
So anyway, finishing a very convoluted answer, the what if was, since we cannot see from satellites,
individual specimens of any species.
They're far too small.
We can't even see herds.
They don't register.
It would be entirely possible if there was a pocket of hominy that would still be allowed for us not to know it.
There are other species that we have not learned about until the last two decades.
And they're everywhere.
They're in the grasslands, they're in the forest, they're in the sea.
They just found a mammal in Southeast Asia.
Which is quite unbelievable to find a mammal.
A picture of it in the New York Times.
And then of course you think of the discovery of that Stone Age village in the Philippines.
The Philippines, the Philippines.
So it's not any possible.
From the Watif started a lot of research on the plotting of the book.
And then for the last three years, I kept writing it.
And I certainly hope that I hit a vein of a wide audience interest, because at least it seemed that the book was sold so rapidly, which is very unlike my other books, that I said to myself, there must be here some sort of big mother load of public influence for whatever the reason.
And now we're here sitting together.
Do you think there's a movie here?
Obviously.
The rights to the movie were sold to St.
John's Central Hope.
I know there is a movie because I am a filmmaker and I can evaluate what makes a movie.
Mine, in every suspenseful book, in every suspenseful novel, there is a movie.
Whether that novel is about society, about the mafia, about prehistory, about
relationships between men and males and females, anything that has good suspenseful plot is virtually a movie.
But there would be a movie in this one, a big and expensive one, probably.
It would be kind of fun.
I mean, it would be, and of course, I think the theme of human nature, of course.
I mean, you have these early creatures on one hand, but you also have the moving theme of human nature.
Exactly.
The theme of greed and all the other things.
I know fairly well the time people, because I used to teach clouds myself, and it's...
It's not at all more moral than politics or than anything else.
I mean, like everywhere else, there are individuals who are honest and there are individuals who are so driven by ambition that they don't have much sense of what exactly is the right thing to do.
And part of the suspense of the book is obviously whether this breed will be protected from us, from the sapiens, if in the final analysis they will be allowed to remain what they are and not to be shifted in evolution by
ourselves with our attention, our technology, all sorts of seeking ourselves upon them.
And I want to reveal a lot about the book.
No, no, don't worry.
I don't do that either.
Anyway, it was a complex, difficult book to write, and I had a lot of fun with it.
I never expected that it will generate such interest.
I'm extremely gratifying.
It is interesting that it's simultaneous to this.
There's another book out there, a Neanderthal book, which I haven't had a chance to look at.
I'm just kind of curious that you have a similar kind of...
Of course, your place in time is different from his, and it is a decidedly different story.
But it is interesting.
Well, if it indicates that a big cultural theme goes through the minds of many readers, and also of several writers, that can happen.
To tell you the truth,
This story that evolved in the past, that right behind my book there was another book that was beginning to somehow collect from the heat of the first book.
I became, it's a great way to start being biased against a fellow writer, so I decided not to read this book now, but to read it later on.
I was, in my mind, convinced that neither book, nor any book, is like another book, because if a book is good, I think there isn't anyone like it.
In terms of the subject matter, it is, but this happens so often, you see one book come out,
I was busy when I realized that when I realized that Primary Colors and Absolute Power by David Baldacci side-by-side on the personal list.
That opened my eyes.
So what can I say about that?
I sure hope that
I sure hope that the theme serves well in both books, or in as many books as there are in the market right now.
Well, you know, that concern about what will be done with this group, I mean, that was the theme also of that actual Stone Age.
that they could be in the Philippines.
Will they be changed?
Or should we keep them as a preserve?
Or do we have an obligation to give them modern medicine and stuff like that?
So there are all these ethical concerns.
I met in the flesh tribal people in Africa and Australia and South America.
I had experiences with Stone Age people who are not total human, admittedly, but who live nonetheless.
at least 20 to 30 thousand years ago back in time and the anthropologists and uh the indian agents of the of the brazilian indian service that the the medics the the missionaries who fly in and out those sorts of tribal chiefs although they've been different by snakes to give them uh anti anti anti uh
how do you say antipoison, antigenom, whatever, those people have an enormous
an enormous moral dilemma, and I asked, I remember I asked once a missionary who used to fly, to fly people that were snake dip in an app, and he said, so how'd you solve that?
He said, well, you try to solve it, you pass it in your mind, you're already in the plane, the propeller zone, this guy's heaving in the back of the plane, and you gotta take him someplace where you give him a shot, and you get him back to his life.
So you don't solve the dilemma, you hopefully save the life.
I don't know how we solve the dilemma.
Again, now, did the idea for this novel begin when you were doing your last book?
No, it became earlier than that.
It came about 12 years ago when I was in Africa, in East Africa, and I was in a place that I got out of a compound at night and I started to hear basically the noises of a piece of savannah at night, which I fairly, first of all, especially the voices of sea lions carry.
The leopards are grunting, the lions are sort of yawning.
You can hear a lion belching and yawning a big distance in a savannah, especially if there is a little bit of breeze there.
It can be really scary.
You feel that they're right on top of you.
Sometimes they're a few miles away.
You can't see.
So I had an incredible...
an incredibly physical and concrete moment of panic.
And in articulate awareness, my teeth are very small, my muscles are nothing by comparison.
If I was chased by a lion or a bunch of hyenas or whatever, I would be just easy me.
And that was the moment when I thought, how the hell did we get it together?
That not only we survived, we displaced these enormously perfection killing machines instead of them displacing us.
which I thought was a fabulously interesting question, but later on, after that, you start to read Richard Mitty, you read John Johansson, you read basically these are the classics in the field.
Helen Fisher, they all ask the same question, and they have very interesting speculations, of course.
And, of course, they all posit a missing link, too, which is, to a fiction writer, is very seductive.
Entirely seductive, because it is mysterious, both in its name, and it gives you a certain latitude to invent, which is why I'm...
I don't know what the scientists would say about this book if they wrote it.
I hope that they have a sense of humor, because it was obviously an invention, and there are pieces where I stretched the reality.
That's right.
And it's not intended to be... I mean, it's an entertainment, I guess, fundamentally.
I mean, you describe it as...
It is described as commercial fiction, and I'm trying to accept the compliment.
However, out in my mind was a little laughter when I was writing this book, and I keep on my desk
a photograph of Joseph Conrad because through the years when I was basically trying to get English down as a real literary tool for myself it was very interesting to think about other people who wrote in English and it wasn't their language Conrad started to write in English when he was way past his thirties and he had a similar level for the tropics
He also went to practically all the places where I went.
He went because he was in the Navy, but nonetheless, the fascination of tropics and men against nature, men against wild solitude is a very big theme in both of us.
In terms of the language, Nabokov did not write adventure stories, but obviously went from Russian to English.
There was a Romanian, Eugene Yonescu, who went from Romanian to French, and they were all about four or five.
I was fairly good friends with John Cheever at the time when I defected.
In fact, John Cheever helped me to defect.
John Cheever, John Ashbery, the poet, and a bunch of other people.
Some I'm not here anymore.
Howard Moss, who used to be with the New Yorker.
I came to New York and I met
of very large assortment of extremely distinguished writers.
When I was part of the International Writing Program at the University of Ottawa, we also got all sorts of luminaries coming to visit and to talk.
And I was puzzling and defecting at that time.
With Chivo, with whom I was definitely on extremely friendly terms, I was not scared to be sincere with him.
And I asked him the question, I said, what do you think I should do?
And he said, it depends what you want.
I said, I want freedom.
I said, well, freedom and writing in English are not exactly the same thing.
To be free is hard and dangerous in your case, probably, if you defect.
They'll try to get you back this and that wish they did.
But you do it.
That's basically, it's feasible.
Very many people have run away from dictatorship.
Very few people who wrote in English from another language, four or five guys as far as I know.
And he said, so you have to think whether you want to take the fourth gamble because you may not be able to win the second.
And it was extremely helpful that someone so smart put the question in such concrete terms for me.
anyway so i i decided that i will try here we are the first gamble was much easier of course to win than the second one but apparently i've won the second one finally i think so so it took a few years though it took a good few years absolutely and uh it's not for one to work i wrote i wrote piles of things piles of things that uh were not or were rejected by publishers
Not because of the language issue, as a matter of fact, but because some of them were on commercial, others were sort of combinations of the older writer that I was, who had a far less daring vision about what he wanted to write about, and the writer that I was becoming.
So it was a long translation.
Tell me a little bit about your life in Romania.
I was a best-selling writer in a small nation.
I was extremely young and I was writing extremely explosive fiction and making extremely insidious movies against the regime.
And my last novel in Romania was published with 100 pages excised by the censorship.
So as of 450 pages, you knew the 100.
That was pretty... And it was indiscriminately pulled out?
It wasn't indiscriminately.
I managed... There were chapters... You had edited it or they did the editing?
This was my fourth novel.
What was the title of it translated?
The title translated was God's Children.
And the...
Forgive me, it wasn't God's word, it was Burial of the Vine, and Burial of the Vine was the English title, and Burial of the Vine was later published in England.
It was published in England during my first year of the fiction.
And that book, by the time that they published that book, I was an extremely popular author, so the censorship was somewhat more polite, somewhat more civil with writers who are not.
And they said, very simple, you're not going to be able, you're not coming out to these chapters, period.
And there was a negotiation, which I lost, but I was allowed at least to edit.
the book in such a fashion that reading it you wouldn't see gaping holes and the book was that was one of the the strongest books that that i published uh in romania it was it was a romanian vessel it reached a hundred thousand copies which is an enormous print in a country of 25 million people but that country had no television the way we have it in america people could not travel
So they were a captive audience in both senses of the time.
They were captive to the system, they were captive to the few artists who were bearing within the system.
And this was a contemporary novel.
It was a contemporary novel.
It was about the political situation and the anguish of the young generation seeing that they were stepping into a life that was entirely controlled.
There was a love story that went on with it and whatever, but nonetheless it was a social novel.
So you were known here as a writer?
I was well known.
No one invited to the international writing program of Iowa.
Writers that were not notorious in their respective cultures.
Everyone that came from Poland to Peru and from Greece to
Canada, who were the ones who meant most at that time in their respective cultures, which was an extremely important society of peers.
They were mentored locally by people like John Cheever and Paul Engle, who at that time was running the International Writing Program.
I spent a whole academic year there, and funnily enough, I was the only one, or one of the few who was thinking of defecting.
And basically all these other writers, there was a Greek writer who came from Greece at that time, was in the hands of the colonel Gentiles, and he was not leaving.
And we had that conversation, and he said, look, you can't leave easily your language, but you can't leave easily the life you made.
Everyone was like, more or less.
more or less comfortable in what they have achieved.
And I knew that that will change me enormously as a writer, partly because I wanted badly to go to the tropics and to stand where man became man.
I had my own dreams about a sort of super science fiction kind of writing, about the sort of planetary meanings.
And I was thinking of Conrad, I was thinking of H.G.
Wells, who, in my opinion, in his time, just like me today, perhaps,
was accused of being too much of a popular writer.
And in fact, I think that some of his visions into modern society endure a lot better.
He certainly... Go ahead.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
You go ahead.
But Wells is a very interesting example because in his lifetime,
He thought that his fiction was just entertainment stuff, and he really wanted to be recognized for his non-fiction, which of course today is totally forgotten.
Exactly.
And we remember him from the... Because we all are influenced by the judgment of our peers.
And in all frankness, we don't like it when we get a bad review or when we think that we're reduced from what we wanted to say to the anecdote of it.
So in a society like the England of HG Wells, which was a society that was extremely pretentious culturally, of course, Wells was, he had the public.
who adored him then and kept adoring him since.
And he did not have the nod of academe and of the Royal Society of Poetry.
I think it still exists.
What can I say?
Edgar Allan Poe, who is the man that fascinates me, was accused in his time that he was too much... I don't know who wrote that.
I think it might have been Bruce wrote his quiz.
He said, well, he's two-thirds genius and one fudge.
And that's too much fudge for a good writer or something like that.
Well, the fudge meant... I'm sorry.
I'm sorry to interrupt, but I don't mean... No, please.
But now, you've made the transition 15 years...
Do you write in English?
The only thing that I do still in Romania is when I have to count fast from 1 to 20, I count in Romanian.
And there are a few things that are reflex action.
There are certain prayers that you say in your mind.
You don't say them in English.
You are too new.
All curses, exactly.
When I burn my fingers, I swear.
But apart from that, I'm American-American.
I have two American children.
I'm the only one who speaks Romanian in my house.
But the thinking... No, the thinking is entirely in English.
The process is in English now.
Yeah, absolutely completely.
Was it hard to do for you?
It was hard, but it was in stages, in the sense that
With each book that I wrote that wasn't published, it became easier.
With each screenplay that I wrote that was produced or not produced, living English as a dialogue, in terms of dialogue, indisputably screenplays teach you and force you to observe how people speak.
People speak very interestingly.
I was paid the compliment that for someone who was once a foreigner, I'm writing the dialogue.
It was, thanks to film.
So, well, if some people say, I've been, I've had reviews in which reviewers pointed very, very markedly and repeatedly that I am an active screenplay writer, as if that is so factual, makes me less of a writer or a girl.
Well, how do you respond to that?
You don't.
you don't i think what you do you go on yeah i would think uh writing for film would be quite a challenge and would really teach you some very it's a big challenge first of all i respect these people this is a lot of this is very
skills work the people who write for film you are entirely right you're entirely right the people who write for film and don't disappear after one after one product that's produced the people who write for film first of all have to be enormously smart film business is a business run by extremely smart people people
These people are on occasion cynical about culture and about what they say.
There are times when they're calculatedly uncrassy.
That's very Hollywood.
Hollywood is a great manipulator of culture and of people.
Hollywood manipulates in terms of how the audience responds more than anything, but so does film.
If film was not the science of telling a story through editing,
which is an enormous way to tease the audience, to prepare it, and then not deliver right then, whatever.
If you have been a film editor, film editors know how they can make out of material something that makes sense.
So film is so capable in its manipulations that the people who make films can be very well calculated about the movies.
But it doesn't mean that they're stupid.
Oh, I don't think they're stupid, but... And I think the person who...
elects to write for film also has to leave his ego at the door because you're working with a hundred people as opposed to... I've got to tell you, I mean, almost rise or fall with it, it's yours.
Exactly.
And I'll give you an example.
Can't we get a little stronger love interest here or something like that?
Well, the talk goes on more or less in those terms.
The talk does not get too sophisticated, not too many 25-cent words in the film business.
And I'll give you an example.
There is a completed screenplay at this time, or a screenplay that approaches completion, at 20th Century Fox, based on understanding.
I'm not the writer of their screenplay.
It is easier for a studio, if they buy the rights to my book, to push around a hired writer than to push around the author of the book.
It doesn't matter that I know everything about that subject matter, and this writer has to research, even though in many ways the research is all in my book.
So, Hollywood is as respectful of writers as it is determined to use them on their own terms.
A good friend of mine, Nick Gage, you know, Nicholas?
Yes.
Yes, I knew your neighbors, as a matter of fact.
When they were doing the movie of his life, Lainey, you know, he was co-producer.
You know, they wanted him to shoot the movie.
He is Greek.
Nick's Greek, yeah.
I don't know if you know the story, but at the end he finds the... I said the movie, and I know that he killed his mother.
Exactly.
Well, in the movie, they wanted him to kill him.
They said, but I didn't kill him.
It doesn't matter.
I remember that scene very well.
The core of the scene was when the hero asks the killer, why are you alive?
There's a charged emotional scene.
It's a very good example.
But they originally wanted him to actually kill him.
And he said, no, but I didn't kill him.
The truth is irrelevant to the...
I mean, that's the kind of stuff that happens out there.
Yeah, exactly.
Which is why, despite the fact that novels are much harder to write, and they take longer, they necessitate everything.
I mean, that's a harder way to live, writing novels and screenplays.
Much harder.
I don't think so.
But it's far more to understand in terms of not being told what to do.
But, you know, I mean, you look better.
I tend to out there if you'd make it as a screenwriter.
I mean, there is, I guess, the remuneration that goes along with it.
I had plenty of linears.
So you actually have benefited from your time in Hollywood?
I did for several reasons.
First of all, when I came to America, I knew America a little.
And obviously the freshness of a new pair of eyes in an incredibly complex environment like America is a drug.
I mean, I benefited from that, the fact that I was full of biological zest and whatever, and I had had cultural experiences on the other side that were interesting.
I had a degree in computer literature and languages.
I was from the universities of Bucharest and Vienna.
In other words, I was not coming as a Grammy.
I was not rocking at business.
But nonetheless, the workings of this former advanced society were unknown to me.
So in a way, there's nothing more like America and like the time in the future that America is reaching towards than the movie business.
What do you hope that people take from you from the book?
I would have left autographs.
Yeah, we can walk the car.
Do you mind?
Not at all.
I'm right down there.
This is a fascinating conversation.
I wouldn't like it if you didn't do it.
What do I want people to take from almost Adam?
There's a bunch of things that I want to give a long list.
First of all, what I want them to take is, of course, the adventure.
I think that if the readers manage to see the wilderness through my eyes the way it was two million years ago in Africa,
which is why i think that my book is entirely unique no matter what comparisons because it is in africa as far as i know neanderthal is based in the former soviet union and right it's nothing that that's not against a book but i think that africa in terms of of all of us is an enormously interesting place i think i i try to do it just as i have friends
I have friends who are Africans from Africa.
I checked myself with them as much as I could.
And I used a couple of their names in the book.
I want them to take that.
The enormous, enormous emotion of us, the primates, coming out of the trees into a wide space.
Unlike the forest, which is close and tightly knit and womb-like and whatever, the savannah is infinite.
We're the only species that got out into the savannah on two lakes and survived.
We're the only ones who could tilt their heads back and look at the sky and see stars.
No, other animals look at the sky.
The sky is there to rain or shine on them, and that's about it.
To look at it with wonder, too.
Exactly.
To look at them with wonder.
And I think that...
what happened then is so enormously interesting and gratifying to think about.
I think it would give us all a lot of... a sense of how, in fact, how successful the human race is.
I think that... I think with growing up all sorts of things, but we are in the main
an enormously successful race.
Almost too successful probably.
Sure, sure, but we've had other moments in our history when we sort of went through, we came to the brink of creating changes.
And somehow we managed both to adapt to the habitat and the habitat managed to adapt to us.
I don't think that the story of mankind is finished, not by a long shot.
You know, really, when you think of the time frame, how far back history goes.
Right.
so infinitesimal.
Yeah, exactly.
5,000 years.
I mean, recorded history, whatever it is.
We have really nothing.
That's nothing.
There's someone wrote a comparison saying that if the whole history of mankind would be compressed to a year, the last 5,000 years of civilization will be the last five minutes of that year or something of that sort.
If it's even that much.
If it's that much.
Right.
But I think also your work out on the West Coast is also
I'm suggesting that it's also helping to write very visually.
When you do write, I think that's going to wish the book.
That is a corollary to what you're saying, to see this landscape.
Yeah, but I wrote visually all my life.
And to be truthful with you, I have yet to write a character that I did not know in life.
Of course, you combine them, you don't want to offend people.
But I have not written about anybody that I did not know.
And I slipped myself into my characters a number of times because basically I'm a super contradictory individual.
I'm a very good example of an anxious guy who doesn't know what tomorrow brings and tomorrow brings surprises.
And speaking of that, what are you doing next to embark on another?
I am already working on another novel.
I was told rather seriously by my agent not to tell anybody what it is about.
He said, you've got a lot of high concepts and who knows, high concepts are very easy to rip off.
I am working on another novel and it's again sort of planetary.
Touch wood so far it has gone well.
I don't know what will happen from now on.
And do you have a contract with Mara for the next one?
No, I do not.
This contract was for one book and they have a right to look at my next book of fiction as is standard.
I'm not...
I'm not big enough, I'm known enough to go into three book deals the way other people do.
Anyway, it's speculative.
If it does well, you can get yourself an idea.
Yeah, probably.
All I hope is, all I want is that enough readers read it so that I get the feeling that this long, torturous road got me where I want to be.
In other words, that I have a...
an interchange with readers in America, which is really natural.
I'm giving them something that other people don't give them.
Do you now consider yourself an American writer?
Realistically, I am an American writer.
Specifically, I am an American writer with a very interesting personal story to tell.
I was born overseas.
I stationed in Europe and at the traffic and whatever else, and I'm over here at the age at which basically you want to start slowing down in terms of running around.
I'm approaching my fifties, which is the best ripest time in fiction ripest, supposedly.
So I'd like to slow down a little bit in terms of running around the planet and sit down and write the stories that I know and the people that I have met, who were very many.
of very different cuts and sizes.
It's funny, you know, I have to get another funny material.